# BlueBikes Rider Demographic Analysis & User to Subscriber Conversion Recommendation

## Project Summary

### Introduction
The goal of this project was to provide the management team at Boston’s Bluebikes bikeshare service with key insights about two of their user groups; customers and subscribers. Operating under the assumption that subscribers deliver more stable operational revenue than customers, I needed to profile the demographics and habitual use for both groups before providing a strategic recommendation for how management can increase the number of subscribers using their service, potentially through converting their customers to subscribers.

### Background
This project was part of my study through General Assembly’s Data Analytics Bootcamp. I leveraged my background in marketing to understand demographic and behavioral profiles through a different lens. I then had the opportunity to ideate the beginnings of a strategic marketing campaign that targets groups likely to respond to a call to action. I had the chance to think more like a product analyst than a marketing consultant, deriving as many insights as possible through observing user behavior and habits rather than leaning on the standard age and gender attributes that have for so long been a staple of targeted advertising campaigns.

### Technical Details
I conducted the project in two stages. First, I needed to conduct my analysis using only queries in PostgreSQL. I used pgAdmin to connect to 4 years of sample data made publicly available by Bluebikes containing a total of 6.8 million trip records. This phase of the project sharpened my SQL skills and required knowledge of joins, unions, and subqueries. Second, I expanded on my findings and visualizations by working in Tableau.

### Implementation
Technical steps documentating phase 1 consisting primarily of SQL work are provided in this repository under the text file `bikeshare_technical_summary`. All steps taken to analyze and visualize data in Tableau are visible on Tableau Public [here](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/tombest/viz/BluebikesUserConversionAnalysis/Story1) and documented in the `phase_2_documentation` text file in this repository.

### Results & Conclusion
It’s important to note two key limitations at the outset. First, these 6 million records are a sample of the data actually collected by Bluebikes from 2016-2019. Exactly how representative this sample is of the entire universe I can’t say. The recommendations made here are therefore specific to the observable sample. Second, this analysis did not account for the cardinality of riders. I had no visibility into riders that transitioned from customers to subscribers, potentially contributing to double counting of subscribers’ info and underrepresentation of customer group size. It was tempting to equate one trip as coming from a specific customer or subscriber, but a trip is just a trip and I had no visibility into multiple actions attributable to the same user.

My recommendation to the management team was to prioritize marketing efforts based on customer segments that are most likely to convert to subscribers. I posited that the most likely-to-convert customer cohort consisted of customers that behave like subscribers in every way except their current subscription status. That meant targeting 22 to 33 year-old men who take frequent trips roughly ten minutes in length along popular subscriber routes during weekdays 7-9am or 4-7pm but have not committed to subscribing. As Bluebikes targets fewer of the above criteria, the pool of targets will increase but the conversion ratio will drop with any given marketing tactic. As the data suggested their partnership with MIT was an underlying cause of frequent subscriber use, I recommended expanding institutional partnerships with potential for commuter use. I recommended reaching targets in relevant locations at relevant times with messages about how they could be saving money or how there’s a station in close proximity with many bikes available in real time to get them to start to adopt the service as a more regular part of their routine. Some of the tactics I recommended were dependent upon the data I hope Bluebikes is collecting at the individual user level. But management should have no trouble using the ideas they can for the data they do have and turning to outreach advertising for the rest.
